These two columns of numbers describe the firm’s ability to produce. Recall that economists use the term production function to describe the relationship between the quantity of the inputs used in production and the quantity of out- put from production. Here the “input” is the apple pickers and the “output” is the apples. The other inputs—the trees themselves, the land, the firm’s trucks and tractors, and so on—are held fixed for now. This firm’s production function shows that if the firm hires 1 worker, that worker will pick 100 bushels of apples per week. If the firm hires 2 workers, the 2 workers together will pick 180 bushels per week. And so on.
Figure 2 graphs the data on labor and output presented in Table 1. The number of workers is on the horizontal axis, and the amount of output is on the vertical axis. This figure illustrates the production function.
One of the Ten Principles of Economics introduced in Chapter 1 is that rational people think at the margin. This idea is the key to understanding how firms decide what quantity of labor to hire. To take a step toward this decision, the third column in Table 1 gives the marginal product of labor, the increase in the amount of output from an additional unit of labor. When the firm increases the number of workers from 1 to 2, for example, the amount of apples produced rises from 100 to 180 bushels. Therefore, the marginal product of the second worker is 80 bushels.
Notice that as the number of workers increases, the marginal product of labor declines. That is, the production process exhibits diminishing marginal product. At first, when only a few workers are hired, they can pick the low-hanging fruit. As the number of workers increases, additional workers have to climb higher up the ladders to find apples to pick. Hence, as more and more workers are hired, each additional worker contributes less to the production of apples. For this rea- son, the production function in Figure 2 becomes flatter as the number of workers rises.
